Nmap is a tool to scan networks for different things like port scanning,os scanning,vulnerability scanning etc...
Nmap can be used to connect with target in different ways like tcp,udp,syn,etc...
For TCP:
TCP protocol works based on three-way handshake..the three-way handshake consists of three stages. First the connecting terminal sends a TCP request to the target server with the SYN flag set. The server then acknowledges this packet with a TCP response containing the SYN flag, as well as the ACK flag. Finally, our terminal completes the handshake by sending a TCP request with the ACK flag set.
-sT switch can be used to connect to a network using tcp.
nmap -sT [target/ip address]
For UDP:
UDP is a connectionless protocol.When a packet is sent to an open UDP port, there should be no response. When this happens, Nmap refers to the port as being open|filtered. In other words, it suspects that the port is open, but it could be firewalled. If it gets a UDP response (which is very unusual), then the port is marked as open. More commonly there is no response, in which case the request is sent a second time as a double-check. If there is still no response then the port is marked open|filtered and Nmap moves on.
-sU switch can be used to scan a network using udp.
nmap -sU [target/ip address]
For SYN:
Syn scan is more like a tcp scan which is used to scan tcp port range of a target. SYN scans are sometimes referred to as "Half-open" scans, or "Stealth" scans.SYN scans sends back a RST TCP packet after receiving a SYN/ACK from the server (this prevents the server from repeatedly trying to make the request).
Advantages of Syn:
It can be used to bypass older Intrusion Detection systems as they are looking out for a full three way handshake. This is often no longer the case with modern IDS solutions; it is for this reason that SYN scans are still frequently referred to as "stealth" scans.
SYN scans are often not logged by applications listening on open ports, as standard practice is to log a connection once it's been fully established. Again, this plays into the idea of SYN scans being stealthy.
Without having to bother about completing (and disconnecting from) a three-way handshake for every port, SYN scans are significantly faster than a standard TCP Connect scan.
Disadvantages:
The main disadvantage of SYN is that it requires sudo(i.e..root) permissions for sending packets to a server.
-sS switch can be used to perform syn scan on a network
nmap -sS [target/ip address]
Another type of scans are Null,Fin and Xmas...the main purpose of these scans is to bypass the firewall protection.
The different switches used for performing these scans are -sN,-sF,-sX.
nmap -sN [target/ip address]
nmap -sF [target/ip address]
nmap -sX [target/ip address]
